Beamline Voltage Optimization
A Hands-On Activity with SIMION and Optuna
MIT–Medellín Hackathon
1 The goal
You are given a smallion beamlinesimulated in SIMION. A beam of ions is launched at one end,
and your job is to steer and focus it so that as many ions as possible reach a detector at the other
end. How well the beamline does this is called itstransmission:
Transmission= ions that reach the detector
ions launched(500) ×100 %.
The catch: the transmission depends on thevoltageswe put on the electrodes, and there are
many electrodes. Trying combinations by hand is hopeless. Instead, you will let an optimization
library calledOptunasearch for the best voltages automatically, using SIMION as the “referee” that
scores every guess.Your final answer is the set of voltages that maximizes transmission.
Figure 1: The beamline. Ions are born inside thehigh-voltagecage on the right and travel left
through twoEinzel lenses(which focus the beam). Thequadrupole benderturns the beam90 ◦
at the corner, and the ions then travel down to thedetector. In simulation coordinates the beam
starts at(395,75,77)mm moving along−x, is bent into+z, and is collected in a small box around
(76,76,405)mm.
1
2 The simulation files
All of these files live together in oneproject folder, the same folder you keepoptimizer.pyin. The
optimizer finds that folder automatically and usesrelativepaths, so it does not matter where the
folder sits on your particular computer (the drive letter and the path will be different on every
machine). Here is what each kind of file is for.
2.1 STL files: the geometry
Theelectrode_1.stl,electrode_2.stl, ...files are 3D models (exported from CAD) of theshape
of each metal electrode: the high-voltage cage, the pipe, the lens rings, the bender, the plates, and
the detector. They describewhere the metal is, but not what voltage it is at. SIMION reads these
shapes to build the simulation.
2.2 The.PA#and.PA0files: the electric fields
Apotential array(PA) is SIMION’s grid describing the electric setup in space. There are three
kinds, and only the first one is given to you:
•electrode_.PA#: thedefinitionfile. It records the geometry (which grid points are metal,
and which electrode number each belongs to) butnotthe electric field yet. This is the single
file you start from.You generate the other two from itby “refining” (see Step 0 in Section 4).
•electrode_.PA1,electrode_.PA2, ...,electrode_.PA19: onesolvedfield per electrode,
computed with that electrode at unit voltage and all others grounded. Solving these is the
slow step, but it only has to be done once.
•electrode_.PA0: the combined “fast-adjust” array. Because fields add up linearly, SIMION
can take your chosen voltage for every electrode andinstantlybuild the total field by scaling
and summing the per-electrode arrays, with no slow re-solving. This is what lets the optimizer
test thousands of voltage combinations quickly.
The.PA1...PA19and.PA0files are large (hundreds of MB each), which is why they arenotshipped
to you; you create them once on your own machine by refining the small.PA#.
2.3 The.fly2file: the ion beam
SimpleSetUp.fly2defines the particles we shoot in:500singly-charged silicon ions ( 28Si+, mass
28amu, charge+1), with a kinetic energy of about 15eV, launched from position(395,75,77)mm
in a15 ◦ cone aimed along the−xdirection. Every run flies this same beam, so any change in
transmission is due to thevoltages, not the beam.
2.4 The.iobfile: the workbench
SimpleSetUp.iobis the SIMION “workbench”: it ties everything together (the geometry, the po-
tential arrays, the beam, and the recording settings) into one runnable simulation. When we tell
SIMION to “fly”, this is the file we point it at.
3 Which voltages are fixed, and which you optimize
Not every electrode is a free knob. Somemuststay at a set voltage because of the role they play
(fileElectrodesMaps.txt):
2
•High-voltage cage (+500V).This is the charged enclosure where the ions are created. Its
potential sets the starting energy of the beam, so it is a fixed property of the source, not a
tuning knob.
•Grounding pipe and ground plates (0V).These are the reference (“earth”) electrodes
and electrostatic shields. Groundisthe zero of our voltage scale; changing it would not steer
the beam, it would just move the reference.
•Detector (−2000V).The detector is held strongly negative so it attracts and collects the
positive ions. It is the measuring device at the end of the line, so its voltage is fixed too.
Everything thatshapesthe beam (the lenses, the bender, and the steering plates) is left free.
Those are the voltages you optimize.InElectrodesMaps.txtthey are exactly the electrodes
that havenovalue written next to them. There are eight of them, so this is an 8-dimensional search.
Table 1: The electrodes of the beamline.
Electrode(s) Component Voltage
1 High-voltage cage (ion source)+500V (fixed)
2 Grounding pipe0V (fixed)
3Einzel lens 1 (biased element)optimize
4, 5 Einzel lens 1 (grounded elements)0V (fixed)
6Einzel lens 2 (biased element)optimize
7, 8 Einzel lens 2 (grounded elements)0V (fixed)
9–12Quadrupole bender (four parts)optimize
13, 14 Ground plates0V (fixed)
15Voltage / steering plate 1optimize
16, 17 Ground plates0V (fixed)
18Voltage / steering plate 2optimize
19 Detector−2000V (fixed)
So the optimizer is free to choose voltages for electrodes3, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, and 18; all
the others are pinned to the values above on every single run.
Keep the voltages physical.For each free electrode you must give the optimizer arangeof
voltages to search within. Choose those ranges to match what real lab power supplies can actually
produce; they cannot output millions of volts. As a rule of thumb,±500V is comfortably available,
and±1000V is the maximum you should allow. A voltage the power supply cannot deliver is
useless, even if the simulation “likes” it, so do not let the search wander beyond that. (The fixed
+500V source and−2000V detector run on their own dedicated high-voltage supplies, which is
why those two are allowed to sit outside the±1000V range.)
4 Running SIMION from the terminal
Once SIMION is set up, almost everything happens through a few command-line instructions. You
runStep 0 onceat the very beginning; the optimizer then runsSteps 1 and 2 automatically
for every guess it makes (and you can also run those two by hand to see what they do).
Make sure “simion” is runnable first.Every command below starts with the wordsimion.
For your terminal to understand it, your computer has to know where SIMION is installed, and
3
that folder is different on every machine. If you typesimionand see an error like “simion is not
recognized” (Windows) or “command not found”, pick one of these:
•Add SIMION to your PATH.Add the SIMION install folder (the one containing
simion.exe, normallyC:\Program Files\SIMION-8.1) to your system’sPathenvironment
variable, then open anewterminal. Now plainsimionworks everywhere, exactly as written
below.
•Or write the full path to the programin every command, in place of the wordsimion.
In PowerShell you put the&call operator in front of the quoted path, for example:
& "C:\Program Files\SIMION-8.1\simion.exe" --nogui refine "electrode_.PA#"
(The Python optimizer already knows where SIMION is from theSIMION_INSTALL_DIRsetting in
its CONFIG, so this only matters for commandsyoutype by hand.)
The SIMION manual.The easiest reference is the PDF included with this activity,
simion8manual.pdf. It documents an older SIMION version, but the command-line tools are the
same, and they are all described inAppendix M (Command Line Interface); look there for
every option ofrefine,fastadjandfly.
Your installed SIMION also ships the newer, complete manual assimion.chmin the SIMION
folder (the one that holdssimion.exe); search it for “command line”. Note that.chmis a Windows
Help file, and Windows oftenblocksit (via Smart App Control, or the file’s “Mark of the Web”),
so it may open blank or say “Navigation to the webpage was canceled”. To allow it: right-click
simion.chm→Properties→tickUnblock→OK. If Smart App Control still blocks it, copy it to a
local folder such as your Desktop and open it from there.
Step 0: refine the potential array (refine), do this once.You are given only the ge-
ometry fileelectrode_.PA#. “Refining” is the step where SIMION solves the electric field for
the geometry and writes out the heavy field files:electrode_.PA0plus the per-electrode arrays
electrode_.PA1...PA19. Run it once from the project folder:
simion --nogui refine "electrode_.PA#"
This can take a few minutes and some memory; that is normal, because you are solving a field on a
grid of millions of points. You only ever do it once; after that the field files exist and flying is fast.
If you change thegeometry, refine again; if you only changevoltages, you do not.
Step 1: set the voltages (fastadj).Thefastadjsub-command writes a voltage onto every
electrode of the fast-adjust.PA0array. It takes the array file followed by a comma-separated list of
electrode=voltagepairs.Assembling this command is your Task 1b inoptimizer.py.
Step 2: fly the ions and see where they land (fly).Theflysub-command sends the 500
ions through the field defined by the workbench file and prints where each one lands.Assembling
this command is your Task 1a inoptimizer.py.
You build both commands yourself, from the pieces in the table below and the SIMION manual
(simion8manual.pdf, Appendix M; see the note above). Here is what each piece does:
After the flight, SIMION prints one line of the formxyz(76, 75, 405)mmfor each ion that
reaches the detector. The optimizer counts those lines; that count is the transmission score.
4
Table 2: What each part of the SIMION command means.
Part of the command What it does
simionLaunches the SIMION program.
--noguiRuns itheadless(no graphical window) so a script can
drive it automatically.
flyThe sub-command that actually simulates (“flies”) the
ions through the field.
fastadjThe sub-command that instantly sets electrode volt-
ages, using the fast-adjust.PA0array.
"electrode_.PA0"The potential-array file whose voltages we are setting.
(Quoted because the folder path contains a space.)
1=500,2=0,...The list ofelectrode=voltageassignments. We set
everyelectrode each time so each run is fully repro-
ducible.
--recording-output=out.txtThe file SIMION writes its recorded data to.
--retain-trajectories=0Donotkeep every ion’s full flight path in memory,
since we only need where each ion ends up. Faster
and lighter.
--restore-potential=0Donotundo the voltages after the run; leave the field
we just set in place.
--programs=0Run the batch flight without extra user-program
passes, keeping each run lean.
"SimpleSetUp.iob"The workbench (geometry + beam + recording) we
are flying.
5 What you are going to do
Make sure you have already done Step 0 (refinedelectrode_.PA#) so the field files exist. Then you
run a single Python program,optimizer.py:
python optimizer.py
Behind the scenes it repeats this loop (a method calledBayesian optimization):
1.Optuna proposesa voltage for each of the 8 free electrodes (within ranges you can edit at
the top of the file).
2. The scriptsetsthose voltages withfastadj.
3. SIMIONfliesthe 500 ions withfly.
4. The scriptcountshow many ions reached the detector; that count is the score.
5. Optunalearnsfrom the score and proposes a smarter set of voltages next time.
After all the trials, the best-scoring set of voltages is your result. Results are also saved to
beamline_results.csvso you can plot and inspect them.
5
Your task.Useoptimizer.pyto find the voltages on electrodes 3, 6, 9–12, 15, and 18 that
give thehighest transmission. Report those voltages and the transmission they achieve.
Things to experiment with:
•ChangeN_TRIALS: does a longer search find a better answer?
•Widen or narrow the voltage ranges inOPTIMIZE(but keep them within the±1000V
physical limit).
•SwitchOBJECTIVEfrom"hits"to"spread"to aim for thetightestbeam at the
detector instead of the most ions.
•Give the optimizer a goodSTARTING_POINTto warm-start from.
6